## 11.1 Data Type Overview

-   11.1.1 Numeric Type Overview
-   11.1.2 Date and Time Type Overview
-   11.1.3 String Type Overview

### 11.1.1 Numeric Type Overview

 A summary of the numeric data types follows. For additional information about properties and storage requirements of the numeric types, see Section 11.2, “Numeric Types”, and Section 11.7, “Data Type Storage Requirements”.

 *M* indicates the maximum display width for integer types. The maximum display width is 255. Display width is unrelated to the range of values a type can contain, as described in Section 11.2, “Numeric Types”. For floating-point and fixed-point types, *M* is the total number of digits that can be stored.

 If you specify `ZEROFILL` for a numeric column, MySQL automatically adds the `UNSIGNED` attribute to the column.

 Numeric data types that permit the `UNSIGNED` attribute also permit `SIGNED`. However, these data types are signed by default, so the `SIGNED` attribute has no effect.

 `SERIAL` is an alias for `BIGINT UNSIGNED NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT UNIQUE`.

 `SERIAL DEFAULT VALUE` in the definition of an integer column is an alias for `NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT UNIQUE`.

Warning

 When you use subtraction between integer values where one is of type `UNSIGNED`, the result is unsigned unless the`NO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTION` SQL mode is enabled. See Section 12.10, “Cast Functions and Operators”.

-    `BIT[(*M*)\]`

     A bit-value type. *M* indicates the number of bits per value, from 1 to 64. The default is 1 if *M* is omitted.

-    `TINYINT[(*M*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A very small integer. The signed range is `-128` to `127`. The unsigned range is `0` to `255`.

-    `BOOL`, `BOOLEAN`

     These types are synonyms for `TINYINT(1)`. A value of zero is considered false. Nonzero values are considered true:

```
mysql> SELECT IF(0, 'true', 'false');
+------------------------+
| IF(0, 'true', 'false') |
+------------------------+
| false                  |
+------------------------+

mysql> SELECT IF(1, 'true', 'false');
+------------------------+
| IF(1, 'true', 'false') |
+------------------------+
| true                   |
+------------------------+

mysql> SELECT IF(2, 'true', 'false');
+------------------------+
| IF(2, 'true', 'false') |
+------------------------+
| true                   |
+------------------------+
```

However, the values `TRUE` and `FALSE` are merely aliases for `1` and `0`, respectively, as shown here:

```sql
mysql> SELECT IF(0 = FALSE, 'true', 'false');
+--------------------------------+
| IF(0 = FALSE, 'true', 'false') |
+--------------------------------+
| true                           |
+--------------------------------+

mysql> SELECT IF(1 = TRUE, 'true', 'false');
+-------------------------------+
| IF(1 = TRUE, 'true', 'false') |
+-------------------------------+
| true                          |
+-------------------------------+

mysql> SELECT IF(2 = TRUE, 'true', 'false');
+-------------------------------+
| IF(2 = TRUE, 'true', 'false') |
+-------------------------------+
| false                         |
+-------------------------------+

mysql> SELECT IF(2 = FALSE, 'true', 'false');
+--------------------------------+
| IF(2 = FALSE, 'true', 'false') |
+--------------------------------+
| false                          |
+--------------------------------+
```

The last two statements display the results shown because `2` is equal to neither `1` nor `0`.

-    `SMALLINT[(*M*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A small integer. The signed range is `-32768` to `32767`. The unsigned range is `0` to `65535`.

-    `MEDIUMINT[(*M*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A medium-sized integer. The signed range is `-8388608` to `8388607`. The unsigned range is `0` to `16777215`.

-    `INT[(*M*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A normal-size integer. The signed range is `-2147483648` to `2147483647`. The unsigned range is `0` to `4294967295`.

-    `INTEGER[(*M*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     This type is a synonym for `INT`.

-    `BIGINT[(*M*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A large integer. The signed range is `-9223372036854775808` to `9223372036854775807`. The unsigned range is `0` to`18446744073709551615`.

     `SERIAL` is an alias for `BIGINT UNSIGNED NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT UNIQUE`.

     Some things you should be aware of with respect to `BIGINT` columns:

    -    All arithmetic is done using signed `BIGINT` or `DOUBLE` values, so you should not use unsigned big integers larger than `9223372036854775807` (63 bits) except with bit functions! If you do that, some of the last digits in the result may be wrong because of rounding errors when converting a `BIGINT` value to a `DOUBLE`.

         MySQL can handle `BIGINT` in the following cases:

        -    When using integers to store large unsigned values in a `BIGINT` column.
        -    In `MIN(*col_name*)` or `MAX(*col_name*)`, where *col_name* refers to a `BIGINT` column.
        -    When using operators (`+`, `-`, `*`, and so on) where both operands are integers.

    -    You can always store an exact integer value in a `BIGINT` column by storing it using a string. In this case, MySQL performs a string-to-number conversion that involves no intermediate double-precision representation.

    -    The `-`, `+`, and `*` operators use `BIGINT` arithmetic when both operands are integer values. This means that if you multiply two big integers (or results from functions that return integers), you may get unexpected results when the result is larger than `9223372036854775807`.

-    `DECIMAL[(*M*[,*D*\])] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A packed “exact” fixed-point number. *M* is the total number of digits (the precision) and *D* is the number of digits after the decimal point (the scale). The decimal point and (for negative numbers) the `-` sign are not counted in *M*. If *D* is 0, values have no decimal point or fractional part. The maximum number of digits (*M*) for `DECIMAL` is 65. The maximum number of supported decimals (*D*) is 30. If *D* is omitted, the default is 0. If *M* is omitted, the default is 10.

     `UNSIGNED`, if specified, disallows negative values.

     All basic calculations (`+, -, *, /`) with `DECIMAL` columns are done with a precision of 65 digits.

-    `DEC[(*M*[,*D*\])] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`, `NUMERIC[(*M*[,*D*\])] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`, `FIXED[(*M*[,*D*\])] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     These types are synonyms for `DECIMAL`. The `FIXED` synonym is available for compatibility with other database systems.

-    `FLOAT[(*M*,*D*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A small (single-precision) floating-point number. Permissible values are `-3.402823466E+38` to `-1.175494351E-38`, `0`, and `1.175494351E-38` to `3.402823466E+38`. These are the theoretical limits, based on the IEEE standard. The actual range might be slightly smaller depending on your hardware or operating system.

     *M* is the total number of digits and *D* is the number of digits following the decimal point. If *M* and *D* are omitted, values are stored to the limits permitted by the hardware. A single-precision floating-point number is accurate to approximately 7 decimal places.

     `UNSIGNED`, if specified, disallows negative values.

     Using `FLOAT` might give you some unexpected problems because all calculations in MySQL are done with double precision. See Section B.5.4.7, “Solving Problems with No Matching Rows”.

-    `DOUBLE[(*M*,*D*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     A normal-size (double-precision) floating-point number. Permissible values are `-1.7976931348623157E+308` to`-2.2250738585072014E-308`, `0`, and `2.2250738585072014E-308` to `1.7976931348623157E+308`. These are the theoretical limits, based on the IEEE standard. The actual range might be slightly smaller depending on your hardware or operating system.

     *M* is the total number of digits and *D* is the number of digits following the decimal point. If *M* and *D* are omitted, values are stored to the limits permitted by the hardware. A double-precision floating-point number is accurate to approximately 15 decimal places.

     `UNSIGNED`, if specified, disallows negative values.

-    `DOUBLE PRECISION[(*M*,*D*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`, `REAL[(*M*,*D*)\] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]`

     These types are synonyms for `DOUBLE`. Exception: If the `REAL_AS_FLOAT` SQL mode is enabled, `REAL` is a synonym for `FLOAT` rather than `DOUBLE`.

-    `FLOAT(*p*) [UNSIGNED\] [ZEROFILL]`

     A floating-point number. *p* represents the precision in bits, but MySQL uses this value only to determine whether to use`FLOAT` or `DOUBLE` for the resulting data type. If *p* is from 0 to 24, the data type becomes `FLOAT` with no *M* or *D* values. If*p* is from 25 to 53, the data type becomes `DOUBLE` with no *M* or *D* values. The range of the resulting column is the same as for the single-precision `FLOAT` or double-precision `DOUBLE` data types described earlier in this section.

     `FLOAT(*p*)` syntax is provided for ODBC compatibility.

### 11.1.2 Date and Time Type Overview

 A summary of the temporal data types follows. For additional information about properties and storage requirements of the temporal types, see Section 11.3, “Date and Time Types”, and Section 11.7, “Data Type Storage Requirements”. For descriptions of functions that operate on temporal values, see Section 12.7, “Date and Time Functions”.

 For the `DATE` and `DATETIME` range descriptions, “supported” means that although earlier values might work, there is no guarantee.

-    `DATE`

     A date. The supported range is `'1000-01-01'` to `'9999-12-31'`. MySQL displays `DATE` values in `'YYYY-MM-DD'` format, but permits assignment of values to `DATE` columns using either strings or numbers.

-    `DATETIME`

     A date and time combination. The supported range is `'1000-01-01 00:00:00'` to `'9999-12-31 23:59:59'`. MySQL displays `DATETIME` values in `'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS'` format, but permits assignment of values to `DATETIME` columns using either strings or numbers.

-    `TIMESTAMP`

     A timestamp. The range is `'1970-01-01 00:00:01'` UTC to `'2038-01-19 03:14:07'` UTC. `TIMESTAMP` values are stored as the number of seconds since the epoch (`'1970-01-01 00:00:00'` UTC). A `TIMESTAMP` cannot represent the value `'1970-01-01 00:00:00'` because that is equivalent to 0 seconds from the epoch and the value 0 is reserved for representing `'0000-00-00 00:00:00'`, the “zero” `TIMESTAMP` value.

     Unless specified otherwise, the first `TIMESTAMP` column in a table is defined to be automatically set to the date and time of the most recent modification if not explicitly assigned a value. This makes `TIMESTAMP` useful for recording the timestamp of an `INSERT` or `UPDATE` operation. You can also set any `TIMESTAMP` column to the current date and time by assigning it a `NULL` value, unless it has been defined with the `NULL` attribute to permit `NULL` values. The automatic initialization and updating to the current date and time can be specified using `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` clauses, as described in Section 11.3.5, “Automatic Initialization and Updating for TIMESTAMP”.

-    `TIME`

     A time. The range is `'-838:59:59'` to `'838:59:59'`. MySQL displays `TIME` values in `'HH:MM:SS'` format, but permits assignment of values to `TIME` columns using either strings or numbers.

-    `YEAR[(2|4)\]`

     A year in two-digit or four-digit format. The default is four-digit format. `YEAR(2)` or `YEAR(4)` differ in display format, but have the same range of values. In four-digit format, values display as `1901` to `2155`, and `0000`. In two-digit format, values display as `70` to `69`, representing years from 1970 to 2069. MySQL displays `YEAR` values in `YYYY` or `YY` format, but permits assignment of values to `YEAR` columns using either strings or numbers.

> Note
> The `YEAR(2)` data type has certain issues that you should consider before choosing to use it. As of MySQL 5.5.27, `YEAR(2)` is deprecated. For more information, see Section 11.3.4, “YEAR(2) Limitations and Migrating to YEAR(4)”.
> For additional information about `YEAR` display format and interpretation of input values, see Section 11.3.3, “The YEAR Type”.

The `SUM()` and `AVG()` aggregate functions do not work with temporal values. (They convert the values to numbers, losing everything after the first nonnumeric character.) To work around this problem, convert to numeric units, perform the aggregate operation, and convert back to a temporal value. Examples:

```sql
SELECT SEC_TO_TIME(SUM(TIME_TO_SEC(time_col))) FROM tbl_name;
SELECT FROM_DAYS(SUM(TO_DAYS(date_col))) FROM tbl_name;
```

> **Note**
> The MySQL server can be run with the `MAXDB` SQL mode enabled. In this case, `TIMESTAMP` is identical with `DATETIME`. If this mode is enabled at the time that a table is created, `TIMESTAMP` columns are created as `DATETIME` columns. As a result, such columns use `DATETIME` display format, have the same range of values, and there is no automatic initialization or updating to the current date and time. See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.

### 11.1.3 String Type Overview

 A summary of the string data types follows. For additional information about properties and storage requirements of the string types, see Section 11.4, “String Types”, and Section 11.7, “Data Type Storage Requirements”.

 In some cases, MySQL may change a string column to a type different from that given in a `CREATE TABLE` or `ALTER TABLE`statement. See Section 13.1.17.7, “Silent Column Specification Changes”.

 MySQL interprets length specifications in character column definitions in character units. This applies to `CHAR`, `VARCHAR`, and the `TEXT` types.

 Column definitions for many string data types can include attributes that specify the character set or collation of the column. These attributes apply to the `CHAR`, `VARCHAR`, the `TEXT` types, `ENUM`, and `SET` data types:

-    The `CHARACTER SET` attribute specifies the character set, and the `COLLATE` attribute specifies a collation for the character set. For example:

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t
    (
        c1 VARCHAR(20) CHARACTER SET utf8,
        c2 TEXT CHARACTER SET latin1 COLLATE latin1_general_cs
    );
    ```


    ​```

     This table definition creates a column named `c1` that has a character set of `utf8` with the default collation for that character set, and a column named `c2` that has a character set of `latin1` and a case-sensitive collation.

     The rules for assigning the character set and collation when either or both of the `CHARACTER SET` and `COLLATE` attributes are missing are described in Section 10.1.3.5, “Column Character Set and Collation”.

     `CHARSET` is a synonym for `CHARACTER SET`.

-    Specifying the `CHARACTER SET binary` attribute for a character string data type causes the column to be created as the corresponding binary string data type: `CHAR` becomes `BINARY`, `VARCHAR` becomes `VARBINARY`, and `TEXT` becomes`BLOB`. For the `ENUM` and `SET` data types, this does not occur; they are created as declared. Suppose that you specify a table using this definition:

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t
    (
      c1 VARCHAR(10) CHARACTER SET binary,
      c2 TEXT CHARACTER SET binary,
      c3 ENUM('a','b','c') CHARACTER SET binary
    );
    ```


    ​```

     The resulting table has this definition:

    ​```
    CREATE TABLE t
    (
      c1 VARBINARY(10),
      c2 BLOB,
      c3 ENUM('a','b','c') CHARACTER SET binary
    );


    ​```

-    The `BINARY` attribute is shorthand for specifying the table default character set and the binary (`_bin`) collation of that character set. In this case, comparison and sorting are based on numeric character code values.

-    The `ASCII` attribute is shorthand for `CHARACTER SET latin1`.

-    The `UNICODE` attribute is shorthand for `CHARACTER SET ucs2`.

 Character column comparison and sorting are based on the collation assigned to the column. For the `CHAR`, `VARCHAR`, `TEXT`,`ENUM`, and `SET` data types, you can declare a column with a binary (`_bin`) collation or the `BINARY` attribute to cause comparison and sorting to use the underlying character code values rather than a lexical ordering.

 For additional information about use of character sets in MySQL, see Section 10.1, “Character Set Support”.

-    `[NATIONAL] CHAR[(*M*)] [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     A fixed-length string that is always right-padded with spaces to the specified length when stored. *M* represents the column length in characters. The range of *M* is 0 to 255. If *M* is omitted, the length is 1.

    ​

    Note

     Trailing spaces are removed when `CHAR` values are retrieved unless the `PAD_CHAR_TO_FULL_LENGTH` SQL mode is enabled.

     `CHAR` is shorthand for `CHARACTER`. `NATIONAL CHAR` (or its equivalent short form, `NCHAR`) is the standard SQL way to define that a `CHAR` column should use some predefined character set. MySQL uses `utf8` as this predefined character set. Section 10.1.3.7, “The National Character Set”.

     The `CHAR BYTE` data type is an alias for the `BINARY` data type. This is a compatibility feature.

     MySQL permits you to create a column of type `CHAR(0)`. This is useful primarily when you have to be compliant with old applications that depend on the existence of a column but that do not actually use its value. `CHAR(0)` is also quite nice when you need a column that can take only two values: A column that is defined as `CHAR(0) NULL` occupies only one bit and can take only the values `NULL` and `''` (the empty string).

-    `[NATIONAL] VARCHAR(*M*) [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

    ​

     A variable-length string. *M* represents the maximum column length in characters. The range of *M* is 0 to 65,535. The effective maximum length of a `VARCHAR` is subject to the maximum row size (65,535 bytes, which is shared among all columns) and the character set used. For example, `utf8` characters can require up to three bytes per character, so a`VARCHAR` column that uses the `utf8` character set can be declared to be a maximum of 21,844 characters. See Section C.10.4, “Limits on Table Column Count and Row Size”.

     MySQL stores `VARCHAR` values as a 1-byte or 2-byte length prefix plus data. The length prefix indicates the number of bytes in the value. A `VARCHAR` column uses one length byte if values require no more than 255 bytes, two length bytes if values may require more than 255 bytes.

    Note

     MySQL follows the standard SQL specification, and does *not* remove trailing spaces from `VARCHAR` values.

     `VARCHAR` is shorthand for `CHARACTER VARYING`. `NATIONAL VARCHAR` is the standard SQL way to define that a `VARCHAR`column should use some predefined character set. MySQL uses `utf8` as this predefined character set. Section 10.1.3.7, “The National Character Set”. `NVARCHAR` is shorthand for `NATIONAL VARCHAR`.

-    `BINARY[(*M*)\]`

     The `BINARY` type is similar to the `CHAR` type, but stores binary byte strings rather than nonbinary character strings. An optional length *M* represents the column length in bytes. If omitted, *M* defaults to 1.

-    `VARBINARY(*M*)`

     The `VARBINARY` type is similar to the `VARCHAR` type, but stores binary byte strings rather than nonbinary character strings. *M* represents the maximum column length in bytes.

-    `TINYBLOB`

     A `BLOB` column with a maximum length of 255 (28 − 1) bytes. Each `TINYBLOB` value is stored using a 1-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

-    `TINYTEXT [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*\] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     A `TEXT` column with a maximum length of 255 (28 − 1) characters. The effective maximum length is less if the value contains multibyte characters. Each `TINYTEXT` value is stored using a 1-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

-    `BLOB[(*M*)\]`

     A `BLOB` column with a maximum length of 65,535 (216 − 1) bytes. Each `BLOB` value is stored using a 2-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

     An optional length *M* can be given for this type. If this is done, MySQL creates the column as the smallest `BLOB` type large enough to hold values *M* bytes long.

-    `TEXT[(*M*)\] [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     A `TEXT` column with a maximum length of 65,535 (216 − 1) characters. The effective maximum length is less if the value contains multibyte characters. Each `TEXT` value is stored using a 2-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

     An optional length *M* can be given for this type. If this is done, MySQL creates the column as the smallest `TEXT` type large enough to hold values *M* characters long.

-    `MEDIUMBLOB`

     A `BLOB` column with a maximum length of 16,777,215 (224 − 1) bytes. Each `MEDIUMBLOB` value is stored using a 3-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

-    `MEDIUMTEXT [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*\] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     A `TEXT` column with a maximum length of 16,777,215 (224 − 1) characters. The effective maximum length is less if the value contains multibyte characters. Each `MEDIUMTEXT` value is stored using a 3-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

-    `LONGBLOB`

     A `BLOB` column with a maximum length of 4,294,967,295 or 4GB (232 − 1) bytes. The effective maximum length of`LONGBLOB` columns depends on the configured maximum packet size in the client/server protocol and available memory. Each `LONGBLOB` value is stored using a 4-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

-    `LONGTEXT [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*\] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     A `TEXT` column with a maximum length of 4,294,967,295 or 4GB (232 − 1) characters. The effective maximum length is less if the value contains multibyte characters. The effective maximum length of `LONGTEXT` columns also depends on the configured maximum packet size in the client/server protocol and available memory. Each `LONGTEXT` value is stored using a 4-byte length prefix that indicates the number of bytes in the value.

-    `ENUM('*value1*','*value2*',...) [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*\] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     An enumeration. A string object that can have only one value, chosen from the list of values `'*value1*'`, `'*value2*'`,`...`, `NULL` or the special `''` error value. `ENUM` values are represented internally as integers.

     An `ENUM` column can have a maximum of 65,535 distinct elements. (The practical limit is less than 3000.) A table can have no more than 255 unique element list definitions among its `ENUM` and `SET` columns considered as a group. For more information on these limits, see Section C.10.5, “Limits Imposed by .frm File Structure”.

-    `SET('*value1*','*value2*',...) [CHARACTER SET *charset_name*\] [COLLATE *collation_name*]`

     A set. A string object that can have zero or more values, each of which must be chosen from the list of values`'*value1*'`, `'*value2*'`, `...` `SET` values are represented internally as integers.

     A `SET` column can have a maximum of 64 distinct members. A table can have no more than 255 unique element list definitions among its `ENUM` and `SET` columns considered as a group. For more information on this limit, see Section C.10.5, “Limits Imposed by .frm File Structure”.