## 11.2 Numeric Types

-   11.2.1 Integer Types (Exact Value) - INTEGER, INT, SMALLINT, TINYINT,MEDIUMINT, BIGINT
-   11.2.2 Fixed-Point Types (Exact Value) - DECIMAL, NUMERIC
-   11.2.3 Floating-Point Types (Approximate Value) - FLOAT, DOUBLE
-   11.2.4 Bit-Value Type - BIT
-   11.2.5 Numeric Type Attributes
-   11.2.6 Out-of-Range and Overflow Handling

 MySQL supports all standard SQL numeric data types. These types include the exact numeric data types (`INTEGER`, `SMALLINT`,`DECIMAL`, and `NUMERIC`), as well as the approximate numeric data types (`FLOAT`, `REAL`, and `DOUBLE PRECISION`). The keyword`INT` is a synonym for `INTEGER`, and the keywords `DEC` and `FIXED` are synonyms for `DECIMAL`. MySQL treats `DOUBLE` as a synonym for `DOUBLE PRECISION` (a nonstandard extension). MySQL also treats `REAL` as a synonym for `DOUBLE PRECISION` (a nonstandard variation), unless the `REAL_AS_FLOAT` SQL mode is enabled.

 The `BIT` data type stores bit values and is supported for `MyISAM`, `MEMORY`, `InnoDB`, and `NDBCLUSTER` tables.

 For information about how MySQL handles assignment of out-of-range values to columns and overflow during expression evaluation, see Section 11.2.6, “Out-of-Range and Overflow Handling”.

 For information about numeric type storage requirements, see Section 11.7, “Data Type Storage Requirements”.

 The data type used for the result of a calculation on numeric operands depends on the types of the operands and the operations performed on them. For more information, see Section 12.6.1, “Arithmetic Operators”.

### 11.2.1 Integer Types (Exact Value) - INTEGER, INT, SMALLINT, TINYINT,MEDIUMINT, BIGINT

 MySQL supports the SQL standard integer types `INTEGER` (or `INT`) and `SMALLINT`. As an extension to the standard, MySQL also supports the integer types `TINYINT`, `MEDIUMINT`, and `BIGINT`. The following table shows the required storage and range for each integer type.

| Type        | Storage | Minimum Value          | Maximum Value          |
| ----------- | ------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- |
|             | (Bytes) | (Signed/Unsigned)      | (Signed/Unsigned)      |
| `TINYINT`   | 1       | `-128`                 | `127`                  |
|             |         | `0`                    | `255`                  |
| `SMALLINT`  | 2       | `-32768`               | `32767`                |
|             |         | `0`                    | `65535`                |
| `MEDIUMINT` | 3       | `-8388608`             | `8388607`              |
|             |         | `0`                    | `16777215`             |
| `INT`       | 4       | `-2147483648`          | `2147483647`           |
|             |         | `0`                    | `4294967295`           |
| `BIGINT`    | 8       | `-9223372036854775808` | `9223372036854775807`  |
|             |         | `0`                    | `18446744073709551615` |

### 11.2.2 Fixed-Point Types (Exact Value) - DECIMAL, NUMERIC

 The `DECIMAL` and `NUMERIC` types store exact numeric data values. These types are used when it is important to preserve exact precision, for example with monetary data. In MySQL, `NUMERIC` is implemented as `DECIMAL`, so the following remarks about `DECIMAL` apply equally to `NUMERIC`.

 MySQL stores `DECIMAL` values in binary format. See Section 12.18, “Precision Math”.

 In a `DECIMAL` column declaration, the precision and scale can be (and usually is) specified; for example:

```
salary DECIMAL(5,2)


```

 In this example, `5` is the precision and `2` is the scale. The precision represents the number of significant digits that are stored for values, and the scale represents the number of digits that can be stored following the decimal point.

 Standard SQL requires that `DECIMAL(5,2)` be able to store any value with five digits and two decimals, so values that can be stored in the `salary` column range from `-999.99` to `999.99`.

 In standard SQL, the syntax `DECIMAL(*M*)` is equivalent to `DECIMAL(*M*,0)`. Similarly, the syntax `DECIMAL` is equivalent to `DECIMAL(*M*,0)`, where the implementation is permitted to decide the value of *M*. MySQL supports both of these variant forms of `DECIMAL` syntax. The default value of *M* is 10.

 If the scale is 0, `DECIMAL` values contain no decimal point or fractional part.

 The maximum number of digits for `DECIMAL` is 65, but the actual range for a given `DECIMAL` column can be constrained by the precision or scale for a given column. When such a column is assigned a value with more digits following the decimal point than are permitted by the specified scale, the value is converted to that scale. (The precise behavior is operating system-specific, but generally the effect is truncation to the permissible number of digits.)

### 11.2.3 Floating-Point Types (Approximate Value) - FLOAT, DOUBLE

 The `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE` types represent approximate numeric data values. MySQL uses four bytes for single-precision values and eight bytes for double-precision values.

 For `FLOAT`, the SQL standard permits an optional specification of the precision (but not the range of the exponent) in bits following the keyword `FLOAT` in parentheses. MySQL also supports this optional precision specification, but the precision value is used only to determine storage size. A precision from 0 to 23 results in a 4-byte single-precision `FLOAT` column. A precision from 24 to 53 results in an 8-byte double-precision `DOUBLE` column.

 MySQL permits a nonstandard syntax: `FLOAT(*M*,*D*)` or `REAL(*M*,*D*)` or `DOUBLE PRECISION(*M*,*D*)`. Here, `(*M*,*D*)`means than values can be stored with up to *M* digits in total, of which *D* digits may be after the decimal point. For example, a column defined as `FLOAT(7,4)` will look like `-999.9999` when displayed. MySQL performs rounding when storing values, so if you insert `999.00009` into a `FLOAT(7,4)` column, the approximate result is `999.0001`.

 Because floating-point values are approximate and not stored as exact values, attempts to treat them as exact in comparisons may lead to problems. They are also subject to platform or implementation dependencies. For more information, see Section B.5.4.8, “Problems with Floating-Point Values”

 For maximum portability, code requiring storage of approximate numeric data values should use `FLOAT` or `DOUBLE PRECISION` with no specification of precision or number of digits.

### 11.2.4 Bit-Value Type - BIT

 The `BIT` data type is used to store bit values. A type of `BIT(*M*)` enables storage of *M*-bit values. *M* can range from 1 to 64.

 To specify bit values, `b'*value*'` notation can be used. *value* is a binary value written using zeros and ones. For example,`b'111'` and `b'10000000'` represent 7 and 128, respectively. See Section 9.1.5, “Bit-Value Literals”.

 If you assign a value to a `BIT(*M*)` column that is less than *M* bits long, the value is padded on the left with zeros. For example, assigning a value of `b'101'` to a `BIT(6)` column is, in effect, the same as assigning `b'000101'`.

**NDB Cluster. ** The maximum combined size of all `BIT` columns used in a given `NDB` table must not exceed 4096 bits.

### 11.2.5 Numeric Type Attributes

 MySQL supports an extension for optionally specifying the display width of integer data types in parentheses following the base keyword for the type. For example, `INT(4)` specifies an `INT` with a display width of four digits. This optional display width may be used by applications to display integer values having a width less than the width specified for the column by left-padding them with spaces. (That is, this width is present in the metadata returned with result sets. Whether it is used or not is up to the application.)

 The display width does *not* constrain the range of values that can be stored in the column. Nor does it prevent values wider than the column display width from being displayed correctly. For example, a column specified as `SMALLINT(3)` has the usual`SMALLINT` range of `-32768` to `32767`, and values outside the range permitted by three digits are displayed in full using more than three digits.

 When used in conjunction with the optional (nonstandard) attribute `ZEROFILL`, the default padding of spaces is replaced with zeros. For example, for a column declared as `INT(4) ZEROFILL`, a value of `5` is retrieved as `0005`.

Note

 The `ZEROFILL` attribute is ignored when a column is involved in expressions or `UNION` queries.

 If you store values larger than the display width in an integer column that has the `ZEROFILL` attribute, you may experience problems when MySQL generates temporary tables for some complicated joins. In these cases, MySQL assumes that the data values fit within the column display width.

 All integer types can have an optional (nonstandard) attribute `UNSIGNED`. Unsigned type can be used to permit only nonnegative numbers in a column or when you need a larger upper numeric range for the column. For example, if an `INT`column is `UNSIGNED`, the size of the column's range is the same but its endpoints shift from `-2147483648` and `2147483647` up to `0` and `4294967295`.

 Floating-point and fixed-point types also can be `UNSIGNED`. As with integer types, this attribute prevents negative values from being stored in the column. Unlike the integer types, the upper range of column values remains the same.

 If you specify `ZEROFILL` for a numeric column, MySQL automatically adds the `UNSIGNED` attribute to the column.

 Integer or floating-point data types can have the additional attribute `AUTO_INCREMENT`. When you insert a value of `NULL` into an indexed `AUTO_INCREMENT` column, the column is set to the next sequence value. Typically this is `*value*+1`, where *value* is the largest value for the column currently in the table. (`AUTO_INCREMENT` sequences begin with `1`.)

 Storing `0` into an `AUTO_INCREMENT` column has the same effect as storing `NULL`, unless the `NO_AUTO_VALUE_ON_ZERO` SQL mode is enabled.

 Inserting `NULL` to generate `AUTO_INCREMENT` values requires that the column be declared `NOT NULL`. If the column is declared `NULL`, inserting `NULL` stores a `NULL`. When you insert any other value into an `AUTO_INCREMENT` column, the column is set to that value and the sequence is reset so that the next automatically generated value follows sequentially from the inserted value.

 As of MySQL 5.5.29, negative values for `AUTO_INCREMENT` columns are not supported.

### 11.2.6 Out-of-Range and Overflow Handling

 When MySQL stores a value in a numeric column that is outside the permissible range of the column data type, the result depends on the SQL mode in effect at the time:

-    If strict SQL mode is enabled, MySQL rejects the out-of-range value with an error, and the insert fails, in accordance with the SQL standard.

-    If no restrictive modes are enabled, MySQL clips the value to the appropriate endpoint of the column data type range and stores the resulting value instead.

     When an out-of-range value is assigned to an integer column, MySQL stores the value representing the corresponding endpoint of the column data type range.

     When a floating-point or fixed-point column is assigned a value that exceeds the range implied by the specified (or default) precision and scale, MySQL stores the value representing the corresponding endpoint of that range.

 Suppose that a table `t1` has this definition:

```
CREATE TABLE t1 (i1 TINYINT, i2 TINYINT UNSIGNED);


```

 With strict SQL mode enabled, an out of range error occurs:

```
mysql> SET sql_mode = 'TRADITIONAL';
mysql> INSERT INTO t1 (i1, i2) VALUES(256, 256);
ERROR 1264 (22003): Out of range value for column 'i1' at row 1
mysql> SELECT * FROM t1;
Empty set (0.00 sec)


```

 With strict SQL mode not enabled, clipping with warnings occurs:

```
mysql> SET sql_mode = '';
mysql> INSERT INTO t1 (i1, i2) VALUES(256, 256);
mysql> SHOW WARNINGS;
+---------+------+---------------------------------------------+
| Level   | Code | Message                                     |
+---------+------+---------------------------------------------+
| Warning | 1264 | Out of range value for column 'i1' at row 1 |
| Warning | 1264 | Out of range value for column 'i2' at row 1 |
+---------+------+---------------------------------------------+
mysql> SELECT * FROM t1;
+------+------+
| i1   | i2   |
+------+------+
|  127 |  255 |
+------+------+


```

 When strict SQL mode is not enabled, column-assignment conversions that occur due to clipping are reported as warnings for `ALTER TABLE`, `LOAD DATA INFILE`, `UPDATE`, and multiple-row `INSERT` statements. In strict mode, these statements fail, and some or all the values are not inserted or changed, depending on whether the table is a transactional table and other factors. For details, see Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.

 Overflow during numeric expression evaluation results in an error. For example, the largest signed `BIGINT` value is 9223372036854775807, so the following expression produces an error:

```
mysql> SELECT 9223372036854775807 + 1;
ERROR 1690 (22003): BIGINT value is out of range in '(9223372036854775807 + 1)'


```

 To enable the operation to succeed in this case, convert the value to unsigned;

```
mysql> SELECT CAST(9223372036854775807 AS UNSIGNED) + 1;
+-------------------------------------------+
| CAST(9223372036854775807 AS UNSIGNED) + 1 |
+-------------------------------------------+
|                       9223372036854775808 |
+-------------------------------------------+


```

 Whether overflow occurs depends on the range of the operands, so another way to handle the preceding expression is to use exact-value arithmetic because `DECIMAL` values have a larger range than integers:

```
mysql> SELECT 9223372036854775807.0 + 1;
+---------------------------+
| 9223372036854775807.0 + 1 |
+---------------------------+
|     9223372036854775808.0 |
+---------------------------+


```

 Subtraction between integer values, where one is of type `UNSIGNED`, produces an unsigned result by default. If the result would otherwise have been negative, an error results:

```
mysql> SET sql_mode = '';
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> SELECT CAST(0 AS UNSIGNED) - 1;
ERROR 1690 (22003): BIGINT UNSIGNED value is out of range in '(cast(0 as unsigned) - 1)'


```

 If the `NO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTION` SQL mode is enabled, the result is negative:

```
mysql> SET sql_mode = 'NO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTION';
mysql> SELECT CAST(0 AS UNSIGNED) - 1;
+-------------------------+
| CAST(0 AS UNSIGNED) - 1 |
+-------------------------+
|                      -1 |
+-------------------------+


```

 If the result of such an operation is used to update an `UNSIGNED` integer column, the result is clipped to the maximum value for the column type, or clipped to 0 if `NO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTION` is enabled. If strict SQL mode is enabled, an error occurs and the column remains unchanged.

