## 11.3 Date and Time Types

-   11.3.1 The DATE, DATETIME, and TIMESTAMP Types
-   11.3.2 The TIME Type
-   11.3.3 The YEAR Type
-   11.3.4 YEAR(2) Limitations and Migrating to YEAR(4)
-   11.3.5 Automatic Initialization and Updating for TIMESTAMP
-   11.3.6 Fractional Seconds in Time Values
-   11.3.7 Conversion Between Date and Time Types
-   11.3.8 Two-Digit Years in Dates

 The date and time types for representing temporal values are `DATE`, `TIME`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP`, and `YEAR`. Each temporal type has a range of valid values, as well as a “zero” value that may be used when you specify an invalid value that MySQL cannot represent. The `TIMESTAMP` type has special automatic updating behavior, described later. For temporal type storage requirements, see Section 11.7, “Data Type Storage Requirements”.

 Keep in mind these general considerations when working with date and time types:

-    MySQL retrieves values for a given date or time type in a standard output format, but it attempts to interpret a variety of formats for input values that you supply (for example, when you specify a value to be assigned to or compared to a date or time type). For a description of the permitted formats for date and time types, see Section 9.1.3, “Date and Time Literals”. It is expected that you supply valid values. Unpredictable results may occur if you use values in other formats.

-    Although MySQL tries to interpret values in several formats, date parts must always be given in year-month-day order (for example, `'98-09-04'`), rather than in the month-day-year or day-month-year orders commonly used elsewhere (for example, `'09-04-98'`, `'04-09-98'`).

-    Dates containing two-digit year values are ambiguous because the century is unknown. MySQL interprets two-digit year values using these rules:

    -    Year values in the range `70-99` are converted to `1970-1999`.
    -    Year values in the range `00-69` are converted to `2000-2069`.

     See also Section 11.3.8, “Two-Digit Years in Dates”.

-    Conversion of values from one temporal type to another occurs according to the rules in Section 11.3.7, “Conversion Between Date and Time Types”.

-    MySQL automatically converts a date or time value to a number if the value is used in a numeric context and vice versa.

-    By default, when MySQL encounters a value for a date or time type that is out of range or otherwise invalid for the type, it converts the value to the “zero” value for that type. The exception is that out-of-range `TIME` values are clipped to the appropriate endpoint of the `TIME` range.

-    By setting the SQL mode to the appropriate value, you can specify more exactly what kind of dates you want MySQL to support. (See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.) You can get MySQL to accept certain dates, such as `'2009-11-31'`, by enabling the `ALLOW_INVALID_DATES` SQL mode. This is useful when you want to store a “possibly wrong” value which the user has specified (for example, in a web form) in the database for future processing. Under this mode, MySQL verifies only that the month is in the range from 1 to 12 and that the day is in the range from 1 to 31.

-    MySQL permits you to store dates where the day or month and day are zero in a `DATE` or `DATETIME` column. This is useful for applications that need to store birthdates for which you may not know the exact date. In this case, you simply store the date as `'2009-00-00'` or `'2009-01-00'`. If you store dates such as these, you should not expect to get correct results for functions such as `DATE_SUB()` or `DATE_ADD()` that require complete dates. To disallow zero month or day parts in dates, enable the `NO_ZERO_IN_DATE` SQL mode.

-    MySQL permits you to store a “zero” value of `'0000-00-00'` as a “dummy date.” This is in some cases more convenient than using `NULL` values, and uses less data and index space. To disallow `'0000-00-00'`, enable the `NO_ZERO_DATE` SQL mode.

-    “Zero” date or time values used through Connector/ODBC are converted automatically to `NULL` because ODBC cannot handle such values.

 The following table shows the format of the “zero” value for each type. The “zero” values are special, but you can store or refer to them explicitly using the values shown in the table. You can also do this using the values `'0'` or `0`, which are easier to write. For temporal types that include a date part (`DATE`, `DATETIME`, and `TIMESTAMP`), use of these values produces warnings if the `NO_ZERO_DATE` SQL mode is enabled.

| Data Type   | “Zero” Value            |
| ----------- | ----------------------- |
| `DATE`      | `'0000-00-00'`          |
| `TIME`      | `'00:00:00'`            |
| `DATETIME`  | `'0000-00-00 00:00:00'` |
| `TIMESTAMP` | `'0000-00-00 00:00:00'` |
| `YEAR`      | `0000`                  |

### 11.3.1 The DATE, DATETIME, and TIMESTAMP Types

 The `DATE`, `DATETIME`, and `TIMESTAMP` types are related. This section describes their characteristics, how they are similar, and how they differ. MySQL recognizes `DATE`, `DATETIME`, and `TIMESTAMP` values in several formats, described in Section 9.1.3, “Date and Time Literals”. For the `DATE` and `DATETIME` range descriptions, “supported” means that although earlier values might work, there is no guarantee.

 The `DATE` type is used for values with a date part but no time part. MySQL retrieves and displays `DATE` values in `'YYYY-MM-DD'` format. The supported range is `'1000-01-01'` to `'9999-12-31'`.

 The `DATETIME` type is used for values that contain both date and time parts. MySQL retrieves and displays `DATETIME` values in `'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS'` format. The supported range is `'1000-01-01 00:00:00'` to `'9999-12-31 23:59:59'`.

 The `TIMESTAMP` data type is used for values that contain both date and time parts. `TIMESTAMP` has a range of `'1970-01-01 00:00:01'` UTC to `'2038-01-19 03:14:07'` UTC.

 MySQL converts `TIMESTAMP` values from the current time zone to UTC for storage, and back from UTC to the current time zone for retrieval. (This does not occur for other types such as `DATETIME`.) By default, the current time zone for each connection is the server's time. The time zone can be set on a per-connection basis. As long as the time zone setting remains constant, you get back the same value you store. If you store a `TIMESTAMP` value, and then change the time zone and retrieve the value, the retrieved value is different from the value you stored. This occurs because the same time zone was not used for conversion in both directions. The current time zone is available as the value of the `time_zone` system variable. For more information, see Section 10.6, “MySQL Server Time Zone Support”.

 The `TIMESTAMP` data type offers automatic initialization and updating to the current date and time. For more information, see Section 11.3.5, “Automatic Initialization and Updating for TIMESTAMP”.

 A `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` value can include a trailing fractional seconds part in up to microseconds (6 digits) precision. Although this fractional part is recognized, it is discarded from values stored into `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` columns. For information about fractional seconds support in MySQL, see Section 11.3.6, “Fractional Seconds in Time Values”.

 Invalid `DATE`, `DATETIME`, or `TIMESTAMP` values are converted to the “zero” value of the appropriate type (`'0000-00-00'` or `'0000-00-00 00:00:00'`).

 Be aware of certain properties of date value interpretation in MySQL:

-    MySQL permits a “relaxed” format for values specified as strings, in which any punctuation character may be used as the delimiter between date parts or time parts. In some cases, this syntax can be deceiving. For example, a value such as `'10:11:12'` might look like a time value because of the `:`, but is interpreted as the year `'2010-11-12'` if used in a date context. The value `'10:45:15'` is converted to `'0000-00-00'` because `'45'` is not a valid month.

-    The server requires that month and day values be valid, and not merely in the range 1 to 12 and 1 to 31, respectively. With strict mode disabled, invalid dates such as `'2004-04-31'` are converted to `'0000-00-00'` and a warning is generated. With strict mode enabled, invalid dates generate an error. To permit such dates, enable `ALLOW_INVALID_DATES`. See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”, for more information.

-    MySQL does not accept `TIMESTAMP` values that include a zero in the day or month column or values that are not a valid date. The sole exception to this rule is the special “zero” value `'0000-00-00 00:00:00'`.

-    `CAST()` treats a `TIMESTAMP` value as a string when not selecting from a table. (This is true even if you specify `FROM DUAL`.) See Section 12.10, “Cast Functions and Operators”.

-    Dates containing two-digit year values are ambiguous because the century is unknown. MySQL interprets two-digit year values using these rules:

    -    Year values in the range `00-69` are converted to `2000-2069`.
    -    Year values in the range `70-99` are converted to `1970-1999`.

     See also Section 11.3.8, “Two-Digit Years in Dates”.

Note

 The MySQL server can be run with the `MAXDB` SQL mode enabled. In this case, `TIMESTAMP` is identical with `DATETIME`. If this mode is enabled at the time that a table is created, `TIMESTAMP` columns are created as `DATETIME` columns. As a result, such columns use `DATETIME` display format, have the same range of values, and there is no automatic initialization or updating to the current date and time. See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.



### 11.3.2 The TIME Type

 MySQL retrieves and displays `TIME` values in `'HH:MM:SS'` format (or `'HHH:MM:SS'` format for large hours values). `TIME`values may range from `'-838:59:59'` to `'838:59:59'`. The hours part may be so large because the `TIME` type can be used not only to represent a time of day (which must be less than 24 hours), but also elapsed time or a time interval between two events (which may be much greater than 24 hours, or even negative).

 MySQL recognizes `TIME` values in several formats, described in Section 9.1.3, “Date and Time Literals”. Some of these formats can include a trailing fractional seconds part in up to microseconds (6 digits) precision. Although this fractional part is recognized, it is discarded from values stored into `TIME` columns. For information about fractional seconds support in MySQL, see Section 11.3.6, “Fractional Seconds in Time Values”.

 Be careful about assigning abbreviated values to a `TIME` column. MySQL interprets abbreviated `TIME` values with colons as time of the day. That is, `'11:12'` means `'11:12:00'`, not `'00:11:12'`. MySQL interprets abbreviated values without colons using the assumption that the two rightmost digits represent seconds (that is, as elapsed time rather than as time of day). For example, you might think of `'1112'` and `1112` as meaning `'11:12:00'` (12 minutes after 11 o'clock), but MySQL interprets them as `'00:11:12'` (11 minutes, 12 seconds). Similarly, `'12'` and `12` are interpreted as `'00:00:12'`.

 By default, values that lie outside the `TIME` range but are otherwise valid are clipped to the closest endpoint of the range. For example, `'-850:00:00'` and `'850:00:00'` are converted to `'-838:59:59'` and `'838:59:59'`. Invalid `TIME` values are converted to `'00:00:00'`. Note that because `'00:00:00'` is itself a valid `TIME` value, there is no way to tell, from a value of `'00:00:00'` stored in a table, whether the original value was specified as `'00:00:00'` or whether it was invalid.

 For more restrictive treatment of invalid `TIME` values, enable strict SQL mode to cause errors to occur. See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.

### 11.3.3 The YEAR Type

 The `YEAR` type is a 1-byte type used to represent year values. It can be declared as `YEAR(4)` or `YEAR(2)` to specify a display width of four or two characters. The default is four characters if no width is given.

Note

 The `YEAR(2)` data type has certain issues that you should consider before choosing to use it. As of MySQL 5.5.27, `YEAR(2)` is deprecated. For more information, see Section 11.3.4, “YEAR(2) Limitations and Migrating to YEAR(4)”.

 `YEAR(4)` and `YEAR(2)` differ in display format, but have the same range of values. For 4-digit format, MySQL displays `YEAR`values in `YYYY` format, with a range of `1901` to `2155`, or `0000`. For 2-digit format, MySQL displays only the last two (least significant) digits; for example, `70` (1970 or 2070) or `69` (2069).

 You can specify input `YEAR` values in a variety of formats:

-    As a 4-digit number in the range `1901` to `2155`.
-    As a 4-digit string in the range `'1901'` to `'2155'`.
-    As a 1- or 2-digit number in the range `1` to `99`. MySQL converts values in the ranges `1` to `69` and `70` to `99` to`YEAR` values in the ranges `2001` to `2069` and `1970` to `1999`.
-    As a 1- or 2-digit string in the range `'0'` to `'99'`. MySQL converts values in the ranges `'0'` to `'69'` and `'70'` to`'99'` to `YEAR` values in the ranges `2000` to `2069` and `1970` to `1999`.
-    Inserting a numeric `0` has a different effect for `YEAR(2)` and `YEAR(4)`. For `YEAR(2)`, the result has a display value of `00` and an internal value of `2000`. For `YEAR(4)`, the result has a display value of `0000` and an internal value of `0000`. To specify zero for `YEAR(4)` and have it be interpreted as `2000`, specify it as a string `'0'` or `'00'`.
-    As the result of a function that returns a value that is acceptable in a `YEAR` context, such as `NOW()`.

 MySQL converts invalid `YEAR` values to `0000`.

 See also Section 11.3.8, “Two-Digit Years in Dates”.

### 11.3.4 YEAR(2) Limitations and Migrating to YEAR(4)

 This section describes problems that can occur when using `YEAR(2)` and provides information about converting existing `YEAR(2)` columns to `YEAR(4)`.

 Although the internal range of values for `YEAR(4)` and `YEAR(2)` is the same (`1901` to `2155`, and `0000`), the display width for `YEAR(2)` makes that type inherently ambiguous because displayed values indicate only the last two digits of the internal values and omit the century digits. The result can be a loss of information under certain circumstances. For this reason, consider avoiding `YEAR(2)` throughout your applications and using `YEAR(4)` wherever you need a `YEAR` data type. Note that conversion will become necessary at some point because support for `YEAR` data types with display values other than 4, most notably `YEAR(2)`, is reduced as of MySQL 5.6.6 and will be removed entirely in a future release.

#### YEAR(2) Limitations

 Issues with the `YEAR(2)` data type include ambiguity of displayed values, and possible loss of information when values are dumped and reloaded or converted to strings.

-    Displayed `YEAR(2)` values can be ambiguous. It is possible for up to three `YEAR(2)` values that have different internal values to have the same displayed value, as the following example demonstrates:

    ```
    mysql> CREATE TABLE t (y2 YEAR(2), y4 YEAR(4));
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)

    mysql> INSERT INTO t (y2) VALUES(1912),(2012),(2112);
    Query OK, 3 rows affected (0.00 sec)
    Records: 3  Duplicates: 0  Warnings: 0

    mysql> UPDATE t SET y4 = y2;
    Query OK, 3 rows affected (0.00 sec)
    Rows matched: 3  Changed: 3  Warnings: 0

    mysql> SELECT * FROM t;
    +------+------+
    | y2   | y4   |
    +------+------+
    |   12 | 1912 |
    |   12 | 2012 |
    |   12 | 2112 |
    +------+------+
    3 rows in set (0.00 sec)


    ```

-    If you use **mysqldump** to dump the table created in the preceding item, the dump file represents all `y2` values using the same 2-digit representation (`12`). If you reload the table from the dump file, all resulting rows have internal value `2012` and display value `12`, thus losing the distinctions among them.

-    Conversion of a `YEAR(2)` or `YEAR(4)` data value to string form uses the display width of the `YEAR` type. Suppose that`YEAR(2)` and `YEAR(4)` columns both contain the value `1970`. Assigning each column to a string results in a value of`'70'` or `'1970'`, respectively. That is, loss of information occurs for conversion from `YEAR(2)` to string.

-    Values outside the range from `1970` to `2069` are stored incorrectly when inserted into a `YEAR(2)` column in a `CSV`table. For example, inserting `2111` results in a display value of `11` but an internal value of `2011`.

 To avoid these problems, use `YEAR(4)` rather than `YEAR(2)`. Suggestions regarding migration strategies appear later in this section.

#### Migrating from YEAR(2) to YEAR(4)

 To convert `YEAR(2)` columns to `YEAR(4)`, use `ALTER TABLE`. Suppose that a table `t1` has this definition:

```
CREATE TABLE t1 (ycol YEAR(2) NOT NULL DEFAULT '70');


```

 Modify the column using `ALTER TABLE` as follows. Remember to include any column attributes such as `NOT NULL` or `DEFAULT`:

```
ALTER TABLE t1 MODIFY ycol YEAR(4) NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970';


```

 The `ALTER TABLE` statement converts the table without changing `YEAR(2)` values. If the server is a replication master, the `ALTER TABLE` statement replicates to slaves and makes the corresponding table change on each one.

 One migration method should be avoided: Do not dump your data with **mysqldump** and reload the dump file after upgrading. This has the potential to change `YEAR(2)` values, as described previously.

 A migration from `YEAR(2)` to `YEAR(4)` should also involve examining application code for the possibility of changed behavior under conditions such as these:

-    Code that expects selecting a `YEAR` column to produce exactly two digits.
-    Code that does not account for different handling for inserts of numeric `0`: Inserting `0` into `YEAR(2)` or `YEAR(4)`results in an internal value of `2000` or `0000`, respectively.

### 11.3.5 Automatic Initialization and Updating for TIMESTAMP

Note

 In older versions of MySQL (prior to 4.1), the properties of the `TIMESTAMP` data type differed significantly in several ways from what is described in this section (see the *MySQL 3.23, 4.0, 4.1 Reference Manual* for details); these include syntax extensions which are deprecated in MySQL 5.1, and no longer supported in MySQL 5.5. This has implications for performing a dump and restore or replicating between MySQL Server versions. If you are using columns that are defined using the old `TIMESTAMP(N)`syntax, see Section 2.11.1.1, “Changes Affecting Upgrades to MySQL 5.5”, prior to upgrading to MySQL 5.5.

 The `TIMESTAMP` data type offers automatic initialization and updating to the current date and time (that is, the current timestamp). You can choose whether to use these properties and which column should have them:

-    One `TIMESTAMP` column in a table can have the current timestamp as the default value for initializing the column, as the auto-update value, or both. It is not possible to have the current timestamp be the default value for one column and the auto-update value for another column.
-    If the column is auto-initialized, it is set to the current timestamp for inserted rows that specify no value for the column.
-    If the column is auto-updated, it is automatically updated to the current timestamp when the value of any other column in the row is changed from its current value. The column remains unchanged if all other columns are set to their current values. To prevent the column from updating when other columns change, explicitly set it to its current value. To update the column even when other columns do not change, explicitly set it to the value it should have (for example, set it to`CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`).

 In addition, you can initialize or update any `TIMESTAMP` column to the current date and time by assigning it a `NULL` value, unless it has been defined with the `NULL` attribute to permit `NULL` values.

 To specify automatic properties, use the `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` clauses. The order of the clauses does not matter. If both are present in a column definition, either can occur first. Any of the synonyms for`CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` have the same meaning as `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`. These are `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP()`, `NOW()`, `LOCALTIME`,`LOCALTIME()`, `LOCALTIMESTAMP`, and `LOCALTIMESTAMP()`.

 Use of `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` is specific to `TIMESTAMP`. The `DEFAULT` clause also can be used to specify a constant (nonautomatic) default value; for example, `DEFAULT 0` or `DEFAULT '2000-01-01 00:00:00'`.

Note

 The following examples use `DEFAULT 0`, a default that can produce warnings or errors depending on whether strict SQL mode or the `NO_ZERO_DATE` SQL mode is enabled. Be aware that the `TRADITIONAL` SQL mode includes strict mode and`NO_ZERO_DATE`. See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.

 The following rules describe the possibilities for defining the first `TIMESTAMP` column in a table with the current timestamp for both the default and auto-update values, for one but not the other, or for neither:

-    With both `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`, the column has the current timestamp for its default value and is automatically updated to the current timestamp.

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
      ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
    );


    ```

-    With neither `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` nor `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`, it is the same as specifying both `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`.

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
      ts TIMESTAMP
    );


    ```

-    With a `DEFAULT` clause but no `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` clause, the column has the given default value and is not automatically updated to the current timestamp.

     The default depends on whether the `DEFAULT` clause specifies `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` or a constant value. With `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`, the default is the current timestamp.

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
      ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
    );


    ```

     With a constant, the default is the given value. In this case, the column has no automatic properties at all.

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
      ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT 0
    );


    ```

-    With an `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` clause and a constant `DEFAULT` clause, the column is automatically updated to the current timestamp and has the given constant default value.

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
      ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT 0 ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
    );


    ```

-    With an `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` clause but no `DEFAULT` clause, the column is automatically updated to the current timestamp. The default is 0 unless the column is defined with the `NULL` attribute, in which case the default is `NULL`.

    ```
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
      ts TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP      -- default 0
    );
    CREATE TABLE t2 (
      ts TIMESTAMP NULL ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP -- default NULL
    );


    ```

 It need not be the first `TIMESTAMP` column in a table that is automatically initialized or updated to the current timestamp. However, to specify automatic initialization or updating for a different `TIMESTAMP` column, you must suppress the automatic properties for the first one. Then, for the other `TIMESTAMP` column, the rules for the `DEFAULT` and `ON UPDATE` clauses are the same as for the first `TIMESTAMP` column, except that if you omit both clauses, no automatic initialization or updating occurs.

 To suppress automatic properties for the first `TIMESTAMP` column, do either of the following:

-    Define the column with a `DEFAULT` clause that specifies a constant default value.
-    Specify the `NULL` attribute. This also causes the column to permit `NULL` values, which means that you cannot assign the current timestamp by setting the column to `NULL`. Assigning `NULL` sets the column to `NULL`.

 Consider these table definitions:

```
CREATE TABLE t1 (
  ts1 TIMESTAMP DEFAULT 0,
  ts2 TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
                ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);
CREATE TABLE t2 (
  ts1 TIMESTAMP NULL,
  ts2 TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
                ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);
CREATE TABLE t3 (
  ts1 TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT 0,
  ts2 TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
                ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);


```

 The tables have these properties:

-    In each table definition, the first `TIMESTAMP` column has no automatic initialization or updating.
-    The tables differ in how the `ts1` column handles `NULL` values. For `t1`, `ts1` is `NOT NULL` and assigning it a value of`NULL` sets it to the current timestamp. For `t2` and `t3`, `ts1` permits `NULL` and assigning it a value of `NULL` sets it to`NULL`.
-    `t2` and `t3` differ in the default value for `ts1`. For `t2`, `ts1` is defined to permit `NULL`, so the default is also `NULL` in the absence of an explicit `DEFAULT` clause. For `t3`, `ts1` permits `NULL` but has an explicit default of 0.

#### TIMESTAMP Initialization and the NULL Attribute

 By default, `TIMESTAMP` columns are `NOT NULL`, cannot contain `NULL` values, and assigning `NULL` assigns the current timestamp. To permit a `TIMESTAMP` column to contain `NULL`, explicitly declare it with the `NULL` attribute. In this case, the default value also becomes `NULL` unless overridden with a `DEFAULT` clause that specifies a different default value. `DEFAULT NULL` can be used to explicitly specify `NULL` as the default value. (For a `TIMESTAMP` column not declared with the `NULL`attribute, `DEFAULT NULL` is invalid.) If a `TIMESTAMP` column permits `NULL` values, assigning `NULL` sets it to `NULL`, not to the current timestamp.

 The following table contains several `TIMESTAMP` columns that permit `NULL` values:

```
CREATE TABLE t
(
  ts1 TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT NULL,
  ts2 TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT 0,
  ts3 TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);


```

 A `TIMESTAMP` column that permits `NULL` values does *not* take on the current timestamp at insert time except under one of the following conditions:

-    Its default value is defined as `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and no value is specified for the column
-    `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` or any of its synonyms such as `NOW()` is explicitly inserted into the column

 In other words, a `TIMESTAMP` column defined to permit `NULL` values auto-initializes only if its definition includes `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`:

```
CREATE TABLE t (ts TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);


```

 If the `TIMESTAMP` column permits `NULL` values but its definition does not include `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`, you must explicitly insert a value corresponding to the current date and time. Suppose that tables `t1` and `t2` have these definitions:

```
CREATE TABLE t1 (ts TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT '0000-00-00 00:00:00');
CREATE TABLE t2 (ts TIMESTAMP NULL DEFAULT NULL);


```

 To set the `TIMESTAMP` column in either table to the current timestamp at insert time, explicitly assign it that value. For example:

```
INSERT INTO t2 VALUES (CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);
INSERT INTO t1 VALUES (NOW());


```

### 11.3.6 Fractional Seconds in Time Values

 A trailing fractional seconds part is permissible for temporal values in contexts such as literal values, and in the arguments to or return values from some temporal functions. Example:

```
mysql> SELECT MICROSECOND('2010-12-10 14:12:09.019473');
+-------------------------------------------+
| MICROSECOND('2010-12-10 14:12:09.019473') |
+-------------------------------------------+
|                                     19473 |
+-------------------------------------------+


```

 However, when MySQL stores a value into a column of any temporal data type, it discards any fractional part and does not store it.

### 11.3.7 Conversion Between Date and Time Types

 To some extent, you can convert a value from one temporal type to another. However, there may be some alteration of the value or loss of information. In all cases, conversion between temporal types is subject to the range of valid values for the resulting type. For example, although `DATE`, `DATETIME`, and `TIMESTAMP` values all can be specified using the same set of formats, the types do not all have the same range of values. `TIMESTAMP` values cannot be earlier than `1970` UTC or later than`'2038-01-19 03:14:07'` UTC. This means that a date such as `'1968-01-01'`, while valid as a `DATE` or `DATETIME` value, is not valid as a `TIMESTAMP` value and is converted to `0`.

 Conversion of `DATE` values:

-    Conversion to a `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` value adds a time part of `'00:00:00'` because the `DATE` value contains no time information.
-    Conversion to a `TIME` value is not useful; the result is `'00:00:00'`.

 Conversion of `DATETIME` and `TIMESTAMP` values:

-    Conversion to a `DATE` value discards the time part because the `DATE` type contains no time information.
-    Conversion to a `TIME` value discards the date part because the `TIME` type contains no date information.

 Conversion of `TIME` values:

 MySQL converts a time value to a date or date-and-time value by parsing the string value of the time as a date or date-and-time. This is unlikely to be useful. For example, `'23:12:31'` interpreted as a date becomes `'2023-12-31'`. Time values not valid as dates become `'0000-00-00'` or `NULL`.

 Explicit conversion can be used to override implicit conversion. For example, in comparison of `DATE` and `DATETIME` values, the `DATE` value is coerced to the `DATETIME` type by adding a time part of `'00:00:00'`. To perform the comparison by ignoring the time part of the `DATETIME` value instead, use the `CAST()` function in the following way:

```
date_col = CAST(datetime_col AS DATE)


```

 Conversion of `TIME` or `DATETIME` values to numeric form (for example, by adding `+0`) results in a double-precision value with a microseconds part of `.000000`:

```
mysql> SELECT CURTIME(), CURTIME()+0;
+-----------+---------------+
| CURTIME() | CURTIME()+0   |
+-----------+---------------+
| 10:41:36  | 104136.000000 |
+-----------+---------------+
mysql> SELECT NOW(), NOW()+0;
+---------------------+-----------------------+
| NOW()               | NOW()+0               |
+---------------------+-----------------------+
| 2007-11-30 10:41:47 | 20071130104147.000000 |
+---------------------+-----------------------+


```

### 11.3.8 Two-Digit Years in Dates

 Date values with two-digit years are ambiguous because the century is unknown. Such values must be interpreted into four-digit form because MySQL stores years internally using four digits.

 For `DATETIME`, `DATE`, and `TIMESTAMP` types, MySQL interprets dates specified with ambiguous year values using these rules:

-    Year values in the range `00-69` are converted to `2000-2069`.
-    Year values in the range `70-99` are converted to `1970-1999`.

 For `YEAR`, the rules are the same, with this exception: A numeric `00` inserted into `YEAR(4)` results in `0000` rather than `2000`. To specify zero for `YEAR(4)` and have it be interpreted as `2000`, specify it as a string `'0'` or `'00'`.

 Remember that these rules are only heuristics that provide reasonable guesses as to what your data values mean. If the rules used by MySQL do not produce the values you require, you must provide unambiguous input containing four-digit year values.

 `ORDER BY` properly sorts `YEAR` values that have two-digit years.

 Some functions like `MIN()` and `MAX()` convert a `YEAR` to a number. This means that a value with a two-digit year does not work properly with these functions. The fix in this case is to convert the `YEAR` to four-digit year format.

