## 11.6 Data Type Default Values

 The `DEFAULT *value*` clause in a data type specification indicates a default value for a column. With one exception, the default value must be a constant; it cannot be a function or an expression. This means, for example, that you cannot set the default for a date column to be the value of a function such as `NOW()` or `CURRENT_DATE`. The exception is that you can specify `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` as the default for a `TIMESTAMP` column. See Section 11.3.5, “Automatic Initialization and Updating for TIMESTAMP”.

 `BLOB` and `TEXT` columns cannot be assigned a default value.

 If a column definition includes no explicit `DEFAULT` value, MySQL determines the default value as follows:

 If the column can take `NULL` as a value, the column is defined with an explicit `DEFAULT NULL` clause.

 If the column cannot take `NULL` as the value, MySQL defines the column with no explicit `DEFAULT` clause. Exception: If the column is defined as part of a `PRIMARY KEY` but not explicitly as `NOT NULL`, MySQL creates it as a `NOT NULL` column (because `PRIMARY KEY` columns must be `NOT NULL`), but also assigns it a `DEFAULT` clause using the implicit default value. To prevent this, include an explicit `NOT NULL` in the definition of any `PRIMARY KEY` column.

 For data entry into a `NOT NULL` column that has no explicit `DEFAULT` clause, if an `INSERT` or `REPLACE` statement includes no value for the column, or an `UPDATE` statement sets the column to `NULL`, MySQL handles the column according to the SQL mode in effect at the time:

-  If strict SQL mode is enabled, an error occurs for transactional tables and the statement is rolled back. For nontransactional tables, an error occurs, but if this happens for the second or subsequent row of a multiple-row statement, the preceding rows will have been inserted.
-  If strict mode is not enabled, MySQL sets the column to the implicit default value for the column data type.

 Suppose that a table `t` is defined as follows:

```
CREATE TABLE t (i INT NOT NULL);


```

 In this case, `i` has no explicit default, so in strict mode each of the following statements produce an error and no row is inserted. When not using strict mode, only the third statement produces an error; the implicit default is inserted for the first two statements, but the third fails because `DEFAULT(i)` cannot produce a value:

```
INSERT INTO t VALUES();
INSERT INTO t VALUES(DEFAULT);
INSERT INTO t VALUES(DEFAULT(i));


```

 See Section 5.1.8, “Server SQL Modes”.

 For a given table, you can use the `SHOW CREATE TABLE` statement to see which columns have an explicit `DEFAULT` clause.

 Implicit defaults are defined as follows:

-  For numeric types, the default is `0`, with the exception that for integer or floating-point types declared with the `AUTO_INCREMENT` attribute, the default is the next value in the sequence.
-  For date and time types other than `TIMESTAMP`, the default is the appropriate “zero” value for the type. For the first `TIMESTAMP` column in a table, the default value is the current date and time. See Section 11.3, “Date and Time Types”.
-  For string types other than `ENUM`, the default value is the empty string. For `ENUM`, the default is the first enumeration value.

 `SERIAL DEFAULT VALUE` in the definition of an integer column is an alias for `NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT UNIQUE`.