## 11.7 Data Type Storage Requirements

- InnoDB Table Storage Requirements
- NDBCLUSTER Table Storage Requirements
- Numeric Type Storage Requirements
- Date and Time Type Storage Requirements
- String Type Storage Requirements
- Spatial Type Storage Requirements

 The storage requirements for data vary, according to the storage engine being used for the table in question. Different storage engines use different methods for recording the raw data and different data types. In addition, some engines may compress the information in a given row, either on a column or entire row basis, making calculation of the storage requirements for a given table or column structure.

 However, all storage engines must communicate and exchange information on a given row within a table using the same structure, and this information is consistent, irrespective of the storage engine used to write the information to disk.

 This sections includes some guideliness and information for the storage requirements for each data type supported by MySQL, including details for the internal format and the sizes used by storage engines that used a fixed size representation for different types. Information is listed by category or storage engine.

 The internal representation of a table has a maximum row size of 65,535 bytes, even if the storage engine is capable of supporting larger rows. This figure excludes `BLOB` or `TEXT` columns, which contribute only 9 to 12 bytes toward this size. For`BLOB` and `TEXT` data, the information is stored internally in a different area of memory than the row buffer. Different storage engines handle the allocation and storage of this data in different ways, according to the method they use for handling the corresponding types. For more information, see Chapter 15, *Alternative Storage Engines*, and Section C.10.4, “Limits on Table Column Count and Row Size”.

### InnoDB Table Storage Requirements

 See Section 14.11.1.2, “The Physical Row Structure of an InnoDB Table” for information about storage requirements for `InnoDB` tables.

### NDBCLUSTER Table Storage Requirements

Important

 For tables using the `NDBCLUSTER` storage engine, there is the factor of 4-byte alignment to be taken into account when calculating storage requirements. This means that all `NDB` data storage is done in multiples of 4 bytes. Thus, a column value that would take 15 bytes in a table using a storage engine other than `NDB` requires 16 bytes in an `NDB` table. This requirement applies in addition to any other considerations that are discussed in this section. For example, in `NDBCLUSTER`tables, the `TINYINT`, `SMALLINT`, `MEDIUMINT`, and `INTEGER` (`INT`) column types each require 4 bytes storage per record due to the alignment factor.

 An exception to this rule is the `BIT` type, which is *not* 4-byte aligned. In NDB Cluster tables, a `BIT(*M*)` column takes *M* bits of storage space. However, if a table definition contains 1 or more `BIT` columns (up to 32 `BIT` columns), then `NDBCLUSTER`reserves 4 bytes (32 bits) per row for these. If a table definition contains more than 32 `BIT` columns (up to 64 such columns), then `NDBCLUSTER` reserves 8 bytes (that is, 64 bits) per row.

 In addition, while a `NULL` itself does not require any storage space, `NDBCLUSTER` reserves 4 bytes per row if the table definition contains any columns defined as `NULL`, up to 32 `NULL` columns. (If an NDB Cluster table is defined with more than 32 `NULL` columns up to 64 `NULL` columns, then 8 bytes per row is reserved.)

 When calculating storage requirements for NDB Cluster tables, you must also remember that every table using the`NDBCLUSTER` storage engine requires a primary key; if no primary key is defined by the user, then a “hidden” primary key will be created by `NDB`. This hidden primary key consumes 31-35 bytes per table record.

 You may find the `ndb_size.pl` utility to be useful for estimating `NDB` storage requirements. This Perl script connects to a current MySQL (non-Cluster) database and creates a report on how much space that database would require if it used the`NDBCLUSTER` storage engine. See Section 18.4.25, “**ndb_size.pl** — NDBCLUSTER Size Requirement Estimator”, for more information.

### Numeric Type Storage Requirements

| Data Type                             | Storage Required                         |
| ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `TINYINT`                             | 1 byte                                   |
| `SMALLINT`                            | 2 bytes                                  |
| `MEDIUMINT`                           | 3 bytes                                  |
| `INT`, `INTEGER`                      | 4 bytes                                  |
| `BIGINT`                              | 8 bytes                                  |
| `FLOAT(*p*)`                          | 4 bytes if 0 <= *p* <= 24, 8 bytes if 25 <= *p* <= 53 |
| `FLOAT`                               | 4 bytes                                  |
| `DOUBLE [PRECISION]`, `REAL`          | 8 bytes                                  |
| `DECIMAL(*M*,*D*)`,`NUMERIC(*M*,*D*)` | Varies; see following discussion         |
| `BIT(*M*)`                            | approximately (*M*+7)/8 bytes            |

 Values for `DECIMAL` (and `NUMERIC`) columns are represented using a binary format that packs nine decimal (base 10) digits into four bytes. Storage for the integer and fractional parts of each value are determined separately. Each multiple of nine digits requires four bytes, and the “leftover” digits require some fraction of four bytes. The storage required for excess digits is given by the following table.

| Leftover Digits | Number of Bytes |
| --------------- | --------------- |
| 0               | 0               |
| 1               | 1               |
| 2               | 1               |
| 3               | 2               |
| 4               | 2               |
| 5               | 3               |
| 6               | 3               |
| 7               | 4               |
| 8               | 4               |

### Date and Time Type Storage Requirements

| Data Type   | Storage Required |
| ----------- | ---------------- |
| `DATE`      | 3 bytes          |
| `TIME`      | 3 bytes          |
| `DATETIME`  | 8 bytes          |
| `TIMESTAMP` | 4 bytes          |
| `YEAR`      | 1 byte           |

 For details about internal representation of temporal values, see [MySQL Internals: Important Algorithms and Structures](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/internals/en/algorithms.html).

### String Type Storage Requirements

 In the following table, *M* represents the declared column length in characters for nonbinary string types and bytes for binary string types. *L* represents the actual length in bytes of a given string value.

| Data Type                         | Storage Required                         |
| --------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `CHAR(*M*)`                       | *M* × *w* bytes, 0 `<= *M* <=` 255, where *w* is the number of bytes required for the maximum-length character in the character set. See Section 14.11.1.2, “The Physical Row Structure of an InnoDB Table” for information about `CHAR` data type storage requirements for `InnoDB` tables. |
| `BINARY(*M*)`                     | *M* bytes, 0 `<= *M* <=` 255             |
| `VARCHAR(*M*)`, `VARBINARY(*M*)`  | *L* + 1 bytes if column values require 0 − 255 bytes, *L* + 2 bytes if values may require more than 255 bytes |
| `TINYBLOB`, `TINYTEXT`            | *L* + 1 bytes, where *L* < 28            |
| `BLOB`, `TEXT`                    | *L* + 2 bytes, where *L* < 216           |
| `MEDIUMBLOB`, `MEDIUMTEXT`        | *L* + 3 bytes, where *L* < 224           |
| `LONGBLOB`, `LONGTEXT`            | *L* + 4 bytes, where *L* < 232           |
| `ENUM('*value1*','*value2*',...)` | 1 or 2 bytes, depending on the number of enumeration values (65,535 values maximum) |
| `SET('*value1*','*value2*',...)`  | 1, 2, 3, 4, or 8 bytes, depending on the number of set members (64members maximum) |

 Variable-length string types are stored using a length prefix plus data. The length prefix requires from one to four bytes depending on the data type, and the value of the prefix is *L* (the byte length of the string). For example, storage for a`MEDIUMTEXT` value requires *L* bytes to store the value plus three bytes to store the length of the value.

 To calculate the number of bytes used to store a particular `CHAR`, `VARCHAR`, or `TEXT` column value, you must take into account the character set used for that column and whether the value contains multibyte characters. In particular, when using a `utf8` Unicode character set, you must keep in mind that not all characters use the same number of bytes. `utf8mb3` and `utf8mb4` character sets can require up to three and four bytes per character, respectively. For a breakdown of the storage used for different categories of `utf8mb3` or `utf8mb4` characters, see Section 10.1.9, “Unicode Support”.

 `VARCHAR`, `VARBINARY`, and the `BLOB` and `TEXT` types are variable-length types. For each, the storage requirements depend on these factors:

-  The actual length of the column value
-  The column's maximum possible length
-  The character set used for the column, because some character sets contain multibyte characters

 For example, a `VARCHAR(255)` column can hold a string with a maximum length of 255 characters. Assuming that the column uses the `latin1` character set (one byte per character), the actual storage required is the length of the string (*L*), plus one byte to record the length of the string. For the string `'abcd'`, *L* is 4 and the storage requirement is five bytes. If the same column is instead declared to use the `ucs2` double-byte character set, the storage requirement is 10 bytes: The length of `'abcd'` is eight bytes and the column requires two bytes to store lengths because the maximum length is greater than 255 (up to 510 bytes).

 The effective maximum number of *bytes* that can be stored in a `VARCHAR` or `VARBINARY` column is subject to the maximum row size of 65,535 bytes, which is shared among all columns. For a `VARCHAR` column that stores multibyte characters, the effective maximum number of *characters* is less. For example, `utf8mb3` characters can require up to three bytes per character, so a `VARCHAR` column that uses the `utf8mb3` character set can be declared to be a maximum of 21,844 characters. See Section C.10.4, “Limits on Table Column Count and Row Size”.

 `InnoDB` encodes fixed-length fields greater than or equal to 768 bytes in length as variable-length fields, which can be stored off-page. For example, a `CHAR(255)` column can exceed 768 bytes if the maximum byte length of the character set is greater than 3, as it is with `utf8mb4`.

 The `NDBCLUSTER` storage engine supports variable-width columns. This means that a `VARCHAR` column in an NDB Cluster table requires the same amount of storage as would any other storage engine, with the exception that such values are 4-byte aligned. Thus, the string `'abcd'` stored in a `VARCHAR(50)` column using the `latin1` character set requires 8 bytes (rather than 5 bytes for the same column value in a `MyISAM` table).

 `TEXT` and `BLOB` columns are implemented differently in the NDB Cluster storage engine, wherein each row in a `TEXT`column is made up of two separate parts. One of these is of fixed size (256 bytes), and is actually stored in the original table. The other consists of any data in excess of 256 bytes, which is stored in a hidden table. The rows in this second table are always 2,000 bytes long. This means that the size of a `TEXT` column is 256 if *size* <= 256 (where *size* represents the size of the row); otherwise, the size is 256 + *size* + (2000 − (*size* − 256) % 2000).

 The size of an `ENUM` object is determined by the number of different enumeration values. One byte is used for enumerations with up to 255 possible values. Two bytes are used for enumerations having between 256 and 65,535 possible values. See Section 11.4.4, “The ENUM Type”.

 The size of a `SET` object is determined by the number of different set members. If the set size is *N*, the object occupies`(*N*+7)/8` bytes, rounded up to 1, 2, 3, 4, or 8 bytes. A `SET` can have a maximum of 64 members. See Section 11.4.5, “The SET Type”.

### Spatial Type Storage Requirements

 MySQL stores geometry values using 4 bytes to indicate the SRID followed by the WKB representation of the value. The`LENGTH()` function returns the space in bytes required for value storage.

 For descriptions of WKB and internal storage formats for spatial values, see Section 11.5.3, “Supported Spatial Data Formats”.