

## 13.5 Prepared SQL Statement Syntax

MySQL 5.5 provides support for server-side prepared    statements. This support takes advantage of the efficient    client/server binary protocol, provided that you use an appropriate    client programming interface. Candidate interfaces include the MySQL    C API client library (for C programs), MySQL Connector/J (for Java    programs), and MySQL Connector/Net. For example, the C API provides    a set of function calls that make up its prepared statement API. See    [Section 23.8.8, “C API Prepared Statements”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/connectors-apis.html#c-api-prepared-statements). Other language    interfaces can provide support for prepared statements that use the    binary protocol by linking in the C client library, one example    being the    [`mysqli`    extension](http://php.net/mysqli), available in PHP 5.0 and later.  

An alternative SQL interface to prepared statements is available.    This interface is not as efficient as using the binary protocol    through a prepared statement API, but requires no programming    because it is available directly at the SQL level:

- ​        You can use it when no programming interface is available to        you.      
- ​        You can use it from any program that enables you to send SQL        statements to the server to be executed, such as the        [**mysql**](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/programs.html#mysql) client program.      
- ​        You can use it even if the client is using an old version of the        client library. The only requirement is that you be able to        connect to a server that is recent enough to support SQL syntax        for prepared statements.

​    SQL syntax for prepared statements is intended to be used for    situations such as these:

- ​        You want to test how prepared statements work in your        application before coding it.      
- ​        An application has problems executing prepared statements and        you want to determine interactively what the problem is.      
- ​        You want to create a test case that describes a problem you are        having with prepared statements, so that you can file a bug        report.      
- ​        You need to use prepared statements but do not have access to a        programming API that supports them.

​    SQL syntax for prepared statements is based on three SQL statements:

- ​        [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare) prepares a statement for        execution (see [Section 13.5.1, “PREPARE Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare)).      
- ​        [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute) executes a prepared        statement (see [Section 13.5.2, “EXECUTE Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute)).      
- ​        [`DEALLOCATE PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#deallocate-prepare) releases a        prepared statement (see [Section 13.5.3, “DEALLOCATE PREPARE Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#deallocate-prepare)).

​    The following examples show two equivalent ways of preparing a    statement that computes the hypotenuse of a triangle given the    lengths of the two sides.  

​    The first example shows how to create a prepared statement by using    a string literal to supply the text of the statement:  

```
mysql> PREPARE stmt1 FROM 'SELECT SQRT(POW(?,2) + POW(?,2)) AS hypotenuse';
mysql> SET @a = 3;
mysql> SET @b = 4;
mysql> EXECUTE stmt1 USING @a, @b;
+------------+
| hypotenuse |
+------------+
|          5 |
+------------+
mysql> DEALLOCATE PREPARE stmt1;

```

​    The second example is similar, but supplies the text of the    statement as a user variable:  

```
mysql> SET @s = 'SELECT SQRT(POW(?,2) + POW(?,2)) AS hypotenuse';
mysql> PREPARE stmt2 FROM @s;
mysql> SET @a = 6;
mysql> SET @b = 8;
mysql> EXECUTE stmt2 USING @a, @b;
+------------+
| hypotenuse |
+------------+
|         10 |
+------------+
mysql> DEALLOCATE PREPARE stmt2;

```

​    Here is an additional example that demonstrates how to choose the    table on which to perform a query at runtime, by storing the name of    the table as a user variable:  

```
mysql> USE test;
mysql> CREATE TABLE t1 (a INT NOT NULL);
mysql> INSERT INTO t1 VALUES (4), (8), (11), (32), (80);

mysql> SET @table = 't1';
mysql> SET @s = CONCAT('SELECT * FROM ', @table);

mysql> PREPARE stmt3 FROM @s;
mysql> EXECUTE stmt3;
+----+
| a  |
+----+
|  4 |
|  8 |
| 11 |
| 32 |
| 80 |
+----+

mysql> DEALLOCATE PREPARE stmt3;

```

​    A prepared statement is specific to the session in which it was    created. If you terminate a session without deallocating a    previously prepared statement, the server deallocates it    automatically.  

​    A prepared statement is also global to the session. If you create a    prepared statement within a stored routine, it is not deallocated    when the stored routine ends.  

​    To guard against too many prepared statements being created    simultaneously, set the    [`max_prepared_stmt_count`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/server-administration.html#sysvar_max_prepared_stmt_count) system    variable. To prevent the use of prepared statements, set the value    to 0.  

​    The following SQL statements can be used as prepared statements:  

```
ALTER TABLE
ANALYZE TABLE
CACHE INDEX
CALL
CHANGE MASTER
CHECKSUM {TABLE | TABLES}
COMMIT
{CREATE | RENAME | DROP} DATABASE
{CREATE | DROP} INDEX
{CREATE | RENAME | DROP} TABLE
{CREATE | RENAME | DROP} USER
{CREATE | DROP} VIEW
DELETE
DO
FLUSH {TABLE | TABLES | TABLES WITH READ LOCK | HOSTS | PRIVILEGES
  | LOGS | STATUS | MASTER | SLAVE | DES_KEY_FILE | USER_RESOURCES}
GRANT
INSERT
INSTALL PLUGIN
KILL
LOAD INDEX INTO CACHE
OPTIMIZE TABLE
REPAIR TABLE
REPLACE
RESET {MASTER | SLAVE | QUERY CACHE}
REVOKE
SELECT
SET
SHOW {AUTHORS | CONTRIBUTORS | WARNINGS | ERRORS}
SHOW BINLOG EVENTS
SHOW CREATE {PROCEDURE | FUNCTION | EVENT | TABLE | VIEW}
SHOW {MASTER | BINARY} LOGS
SHOW {MASTER | SLAVE} STATUS
SLAVE {START | STOP}
TRUNCATE TABLE
UNINSTALL PLUGIN
UPDATE

```

​    Other statements are not supported in MySQL 5.5.  

​    Generally, statements not permitted in SQL prepared statements are    also not permitted in stored programs. Exceptions are noted in    [Section C.1, “Restrictions on Stored Programs”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/restrictions.html#stored-program-restrictions).  

​    Metadata changes to tables or views referred to by prepared    statements are detected and cause automatic repreparation of the    statement when it is next executed. For more information, see    [Section 13.5.4, “Automatic Prepared Statement Repreparation”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#statement-repreparation).  

​    Placeholders can be used for the arguments of the    `LIMIT` clause when using prepared statements. See    [Section 13.2.9, “SELECT Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#select).  

​    In prepared [`CALL`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#call) statements used with    [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare) and    [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute), placeholder support for    `OUT` and `INOUT` parameters is    available beginning with MySQL 5.5. See    [Section 13.2.1, “CALL Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#call), for an example and a workaround for earlier    versions. Placeholders can be used for `IN`    parameters regardless of version.  

​    SQL syntax for prepared statements cannot be used in nested fashion.    That is, a statement passed to    [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare) cannot itself be a    [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare),    [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute), or    [`DEALLOCATE PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#deallocate-prepare) statement.  

​    SQL syntax for prepared statements is distinct from using prepared    statement API calls. For example, you cannot use the    [`mysql_stmt_prepare()`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/connectors-apis.html#mysql-stmt-prepare) C API function    to prepare a [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare),    [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute), or    [`DEALLOCATE PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#deallocate-prepare) statement.  

​    SQL syntax for prepared statements can be used within stored    procedures, but not in stored functions or triggers. However, a    cursor cannot be used for a dynamic statement that is prepared and    executed with [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare) and    [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute). The statement for a cursor    is checked at cursor creation time, so the statement cannot be    dynamic.  

​    SQL syntax for prepared statements does not support multi-statements    (that is, multiple statements within a single string separated by    `;` characters).  

​    Prepared statements use the query cache under the conditions    described in [Section 8.10.3.1, “How the Query Cache Operates”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/optimization.html#query-cache-operation).  

​    To write C programs that use the [`CALL`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#call)    SQL statement to execute stored procedures that contain prepared    statements, the `CLIENT_MULTI_RESULTS` flag must be    enabled. This is because each [`CALL`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#call)    returns a result to indicate the call status, in addition to any    result sets that might be returned by statements executed within the    procedure.  

​    `CLIENT_MULTI_RESULTS` can be enabled when you call    [`mysql_real_connect()`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/connectors-apis.html#mysql-real-connect), either    explicitly by passing the `CLIENT_MULTI_RESULTS`    flag itself, or implicitly by passing    `CLIENT_MULTI_STATEMENTS` (which also enables    `CLIENT_MULTI_RESULTS`). For additional    information, see [Section 13.2.1, “CALL Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#call).

### 13.5.1 PREPARE Syntax

```
PREPARE stmt_name FROM preparable_stmt

```

​      The [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare) statement prepares a      SQL statement and assigns it a name,      *stmt_name*, by which to refer to the      statement later. The prepared statement is executed with      [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute) and released with      [`DEALLOCATE PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#deallocate-prepare). For examples,      see [Section 13.5, “Prepared SQL Statement Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#sql-syntax-prepared-statements).    

​      Statement names are not case sensitive.      *preparable_stmt* is either a string      literal or a user variable that contains the text of the SQL      statement. The text must represent a single statement, not      multiple statements. Within the statement, `?`      characters can be used as parameter markers to indicate where data      values are to be bound to the query later when you execute it. The      `?` characters should not be enclosed within      quotation marks, even if you intend to bind them to string values.      Parameter markers can be used only where data values should      appear, not for SQL keywords, identifiers, and so forth.    

​      If a prepared statement with the given name already exists, it is      deallocated implicitly before the new statement is prepared. This      means that if the new statement contains an error and cannot be      prepared, an error is returned and no statement with the given      name exists.    

​      The scope of a prepared statement is the session within which it      is created, which as several implications:

- ​          A prepared statement created in one session is not available          to other sessions.        
- ​          When a session ends, whether normally or abnormally, its          prepared statements no longer exist. If auto-reconnect is          enabled, the client is not notified that the connection was          lost. For this reason, clients may wish to disable          auto-reconnect. See [Section 23.8.20, “C API Automatic Reconnection Control”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/connectors-apis.html#c-api-auto-reconnect).        
- ​          A prepared statement created within a stored program continues          to exist after the program finishes executing and can be          executed outside the program later.        
- ​          A statement prepared in stored program context cannot refer to          stored procedure or function parameters or local variables          because they go out of scope when the program ends and would          be unavailable were the statement to be executed later outside          the program. As a workaround, refer instead to user-defined          variables, which also have session scope; see          [Section 9.4, “User-Defined Variables”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/language-structure.html#user-variables).

### 13.5.2 EXECUTE Syntax

```
EXECUTE stmt_name
    [USING @var_name [, @var_name] ...]

```

​      After preparing a statement with      [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare), you execute it with an      [`EXECUTE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#execute) statement that refers to      the prepared statement name. If the prepared statement contains      any parameter markers, you must supply a `USING`      clause that lists user variables containing the values to be bound      to the parameters. Parameter values can be supplied only by user      variables, and the `USING` clause must name      exactly as many variables as the number of parameter markers in      the statement.    

​      You can execute a given prepared statement multiple times, passing      different variables to it or setting the variables to different      values before each execution.    

​      For examples, see      [Section 13.5, “Prepared SQL Statement Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#sql-syntax-prepared-statements).

### 13.5.3 DEALLOCATE PREPARE Syntax

```
{DEALLOCATE | DROP} PREPARE stmt_name

```

​      To deallocate a prepared statement produced with      [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare), use a      [`DEALLOCATE PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#deallocate-prepare) statement that      refers to the prepared statement name. Attempting to execute a      prepared statement after deallocating it results in an error.    

​      For examples, see      [Section 13.5, “Prepared SQL Statement Syntax”](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#sql-syntax-prepared-statements).

### 13.5.4 Automatic Prepared Statement Repreparation

​      Metadata changes to tables or views referred to by prepared      statements are detected and cause automatic repreparation of the      statement when it is next executed. This applies to prepared      statements processed at the SQL level (using the      [`PREPARE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#prepare) statement) and those      processed using the binary client/server protocol (using the      [`mysql_stmt_prepare()`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/connectors-apis.html#mysql-stmt-prepare) C API      function).    

​      The server attempts repreparation up to three times. An error      occurs if all attempts fail.    

​      Metadata changes occur for DDL statements such as those that      create, drop, alter, rename, or truncate tables, or that analyze,      optimize, or repair tables. Repreparation also occurs after      referenced tables or views are flushed from the table definition      cache, either implicitly to make room for new entries in the      cache, or explicitly due to [`FLUSH      TABLES`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#flush-tables).    

​      Table content changes (for example, with      [`INSERT`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#insert) or      [`UPDATE`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#update)) do not cause repreparation,      nor do [`SELECT`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/sql-syntax.html#select) statements.    

​      Repreparation is automatic, but to the extent that it occurs,      diminishes prepared statement performance.    

​      Repreparation uses the default database and SQL mode that were in      effect for the original preparation.    

​      The      [`Com_stmt_reprepare`](file:///F:/Tech_doc/Mysql/refman-5.5-en.html-chapter/server-administration.html#statvar_Com_xxx)      status variable tracks the number of repreparations.